Blog - Multivariate testing, explained (#7123)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/multivariated-testing-explained.md

Author: So I spent a good chunk of time now trying to find good examples of MVT with concrete results. I was able to find some with A/B testing, but none with MVT specifically 😅 will leave this out then

---
title: Multivariate testing, explained
date: 2023-11-07
author: ["liorn"]
showTitle: true
rootpage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
hideAnchor: true
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-company-culture-blog.png
featuredImageType: full
category: Engineering
tags:
  - Guides 
  - Explainers
  - Growth engineering
  - Product engineers
  - AB testing
---

## What is multivariate testing

> Multivariate testing is when you test multiple variables to determine which combination performs the best. 

Author: ```suggestion
Multivariate testing is when you test different combinations of variables to determine which performs the best. 
```

> Multivariate testing is when you test multiple variables to determine which combination performs the best. 

Reviewer: Ahh, makes sense, I didn't know this.

For example, let's say you want to test how both the color and placement of a button affect your conversion rate. You would then create four different variants to test:

1. The control variant.
2. The variant with only the color changed.
3. The variant with only the placement changed.
4. The variant with both the color and the placement changed.

> The results from the multivariate test would show not only which variant performs the best but also how each variable affected the outcome.

Author: ```suggestion
The results from the multivariate test show not only which variant performs the best but also how each factor affected the outcome.
```

It's similar to [A/B testing](/ab-testing), except in A/B testing you're only testing two different variants.

![A/B testing vs multivariate testing](../images/blog/multivariated-testing-explained/ab-vs-mvt.png)

> ## Benefits

Author: rephrased the "it saves you time"  section to include this

### 1. It saves you time

Testing multiple combinations at the same time means you don't have to wait for many consecutive tests to finish. This would be the case if you were to run your tests using A/B tests, since you'd have to wait for each test before starting a new one.

> ### 2. It uncovers interactions between variables

Author: > This makes it seem like every one goes up against each other "round robin", but it should just be every variant goes up against the control AFAK.

The round robin is intentional. You dont only look at how they compared vs control, but also how they compared vs each other. I do think the title can be changed though. Will update

Multivariate testing is not just about looking at which combination is the best; it's about understanding the weight each variable had in that success. This provides insights into understanding your holistic user experience.

For example, let's say you're testing changes to the user dashboard of a B2B SaaS app. You decide to test how both the position of the navigation menu and the text of the buttons affect user engagement.

> In isolation, changing the button texts might affect how well users understand how to use your product. Similarly, moving the navigation menu from the top to the side could influence their ability to navigate efficiently.

Author: ```suggestion
In isolation, changing the button texts might affect how well users understand your app. Similarly, moving the navigation menu from the top to the side could influence their ability to navigate it.
```

> However, when you test these variables together, you may discover that their combined effect is much greater than each individual change.

Author: Hmm gave it some thought. I think since its an example, its okay to say "greater", and I think its clearer this way than saying "different' (or a something similar to different)
```suggestion
However, when you combine and test these changes together, you may discover that their combined effect is greater than each individual change.
```

> Multivariate testing enables you to uncover insights like these.

Author: went back and forth on this and decided to leave it in 😅

## Drawbacks

### 1. You need a larger sample size

Since you split your participants into many groups, you need a larger sample size for a [statistically significant](/docs/experiments/significance) result. In practice, this means multivariant tests need to for run longer than a typical A/B test.

With this in mind, a good idea is to [calculate your required sample size](/product-engineers/ab-testing-guide-for-engineers#4-a-sufficiently-large-sample-size-of-users) before running your test so that you can ensure your test duration is reasonable.

If your duration is too long, but you'd still like to run a multivariant test, there are two potential solutions:

1. **Target proxy metrics** – e.g., if your goal is to increase conversion, instead target a metric higher up the funnel, like number of signups.

2. **Use [surveys](/surveys)**. It's often easier to ask your users about their experience instead of guessing it from metrics. Survey responses can help decision-making when statistical significance is difficult to achieve.

> ### 2. Multivariant tests require more effort

Author: ```suggestion
### 2. Multivariant tests require more work
```

> Because you have many different variants, multivariant tests are more complex. They require more code, generate more data, and need more time to analyze results. 

Reviewer: I'm curious why they take more time to analyze? Isn't the results just a winner and losers like A/B tests? Definitely something to fill out more.

> Because you have many different variants, multivariant tests are more complex. They require more code, generate more data, and need more time to analyze results. 

Reviewer: How does analysis differ between A/B tests and multivariate tests?

> Because you have many different variants, multivariant tests are more complex. They require more code, generate more data, and need more time to analyze results. 

Author: > I'm curious why they take more time to analyze? Isn't the results just a winner and losers like A/B tests? Definitely something to fill out more.

Well, usually you're not just looking at the goal metric, but all the analytics+other metrics. MVTs generate more of this data, so you need to spend more time analyzing it. I'll fill this out more

> For example, if you have three variables and two possible variations for each, you need to create six different versions of your feature to test. Then, you need to analyze the results of each one. A huge effort!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if you have three variants and two possible variations for each, you need to create six different versions of your feature to test. Then, you need to analyze the results of each one.
```

Author: Maybe properties is a better word here
```suggestion
For example, if you have three properties and two possible variations for each, you need to create six different versions of your feature to test. Then, you need to analyze the results of each one. A huge effort!
```

> Multivariant tests can generate great insights, but they also use up more of your team's resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multivariate tests can generate great insights, but they also use up more of your team's resources.
```

## Multivariant vs A/B tests

Here is a table summarizing the differences between the multivariant and A/B tests:

| Situation | A/B Testing | Multivariate Testing |
|-----------|-------------|----------------------|
| **# of variants** | Two | Three or more |
| **Complexity** | Low | High
| **Sample size required**| Smaller  | Larger |
| **Duration** | Shorter | Longer |
| **Clarity of results** | Easier to interpret results. | Results may be more difficult to interpret due to multiple variables. |

> | **When to Use** | When you have a clear hypothesis about one variable. <br/><br/> When decisions need to be made quickly. <br/><br/>  When the test is straightforward. | When you want to explore how multiple variables interact. <br/><br/> When you can afford a longer test duration. <br/><br/> When you have enough users to reach statistical significance. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **When to Use** | You have a clear hypothesis about one variable. <br/><br/> Decisions need to be made quickly. <br/><br/>  Test is straightforward. | You want to explore how multiple variables interact. <br/><br/> You can afford a longer test duration. <br/><br/> You have enough users to reach statistical significance. |
```

Test is straightforward and clear hypothesis about one variable are kind of the same thing.

## How to implement multivariate tests in PostHog

> Now that you know all about multivariant testing, here's how you implement them in PostHog:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you know all about multivariate testing, here's how you implement one in PostHog:
```
